We study a particular compound nucleus. In our case this is Oxygen-16.

O16 can be formed by the combination of many pairs of particles. Here we are interested in three particular pairs:
- proton + Nitrogen-15
- alpha (Helium-4) + Carbon-12
- neutron + Oxygen-15

In scattering experiments we set up a target (N15, C12, or O15), and fire a beam of projectile particles (proton, alpha, or neutron) at a fixed energy at it. We then measure the rate at which each of the particle pairs come out the other end (the 'exit channel'). Then we scan over a range of energies to get a range of results.

For each exit channel we get the cross-section, which is a measure of the rate at which particles exit through that channel at a given energy. The cross-section is in units of area, and can be thought of a measure of how 'big' the target is that the incoming particles need to hit in order to exit through the exit channel in question. Note that it is not actually a measure of physical size, and cross-section area sizes differ wildly to the actual physical size of the nucleus. It is an effective area, representing the probability of a given reaction occurring.

We set up detectors at a few angles to catch particles that come out the other end. We will detect protons, alphas, or neutrons at different energies, and infer the other particle with conservation of energy. With these, we are then measuring the differential cross-section, where we now break down the cross-section by angle as well as by energy. This breakdown is useful as the angular distribution carries information about orbital angular momentum, as different partial waves have characteristic angular distributions (described by Legendre polynomials).

When projectile particle is fired at specific energies, it can match with an excited state of the compound nucleus (O16), so that the projectile and the target temporarily fuse together to form it. This is known as a resonance. When this happens the cross-sections are increased as reactions are more likely to occur, and there will be a peak in the cross-section centred at this energy.

A resonance will exist for a certain amount of time before it decays. When the resonance decays quickly, its peak will be wide, and when it decays after a (relatively) long time, its peak will be narrow. This comes from the fact that the nucleus is described by a wave oscillating at a specific frequency, which can be decomposed into many other frequencies through something like the Fourier transform. A short lived burst of energy is decomposed into a very large number of frequencies, while a longer lived one into a smaller number of frequencies (in the limit, an infinitely long oscillating wave has one exact frequency). As energy is directly related to frequency, a resonant state cannot have a single definite energy, and the peak will have some amount of width, inversely proportional to its lifetime. To be precise, the width is actually the full width at half maximum (FWHM).

The particles in each pair have intrinsic angular momentum, known as their spin, and the combination of the two spins gives s, the channel spin. We also have the orbital angular momentum l, which is the orbital angular momentum of the relative motion between the two particles. Together, s and l combine to give J, which, can take value in integer steps from |l-s| to l+s.

Each particle also has intrinsic parity pi, either +1 (even) or -1 (odd), which relates to how the quantum state behaves when mirrored. The total parity of a channel includes a contribution from orbital angular momentum. Specifically, pi_total = pi_1 * pi_2 * (-1)^l.

The compound nucleus too will have a J and a pi. It can only have certain values for each based on the particles which formed it, and so only certain combinations (known as J^pi sets) are allowed for each resonance as J and pi are conserved quantities in the strong interaction. This further defines our entrance and exit channels, as not only do we care about which particle pairs go in and out, but what their angular momentum and parities are, as that constrains the resonant states further.